README.md, before:

# AirlineCustomerDB

## Ariel Blumstein & Binyamin Klein

## Project Proposal

The goal of our database is to support the operations related to airlines and customers.
The general operations that are supported for customers are:
-Customer Relations
-Rewards System
-Special Needs
-Pet Customers
-Review System
-Outfacing Informational Screens

In any system handling customers, we must have a ‘Customer’ entity. In our system, we expect that we will have customers that are not part of our rewards system so they will be stored in the Customer table. However, to support a rewards system we have a RewardsCustomer, which has a IS-A relationship to customer and contains the additional information of ‘MemberID’, which will be unique to the customer, miles flown and status. To support pet customers, we have the entity PetCustomer which has an IS-A relationship with Customer, and has the extra attribute ‘species’.
In a system supporting airline customers, we seek to store identification for them, hence this led to the entity ‘Identification’, which has a many-to-one relationship with ‘Customer’ (An Identification must be in the relationship a single customer, and one customer only, yet a customer can have multiple forms of identification).
When handling Customers, we seek to allow them to purchase tickets for flights which led to the creation of a ‘Ticket’ entity and a ‘Flight’ entity. Ticket has a many-to-one relationship with both Customer and Flight, as a Ticket must have one customer and flight, yet a customer can have multiple tickets, and a flight also has multiple tickets.

In reviewing our entity for Flight, we found that though we were in Second-Normal-Form, as all attributes has a value, and the key was made up of a single attribute, we were not in Third-Normal-Form as the flights ID formed a functional dependency with the ‘FlightCode’, and flight code formed a functional dependency with ‘Destination’, ‘Origin’ and ‘DepartureTime’.      (FlightID->FlightCode and FlightCode->Destination,Origin,DepatureTime). This was a transitive dependency. So, in order to comply with Third-Normal-Form, we created a new entity called FlightInfo that stores the flight code, destination, origin and departure time attribute, and Flight will remain with just flight code and date. Flight forms a One-To-Many relationship with FlightInfo (A flight must be associated with one FlightInfo entity, however a FlightInfo entity can be associated with many flights). This change is reflected in the ERD diagram.

To handle the review operations, we created an entity known as Review, which has a one-to-one relationship with a ticket, as we only want one review per ticket, and a ticket can have max one review.
All of these entities together can support the outfacing information if a customer would want to request such.

Enums were created when we created the tables to support different value type that expect certain values. 



![ERDimage](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ERD.png?raw=true)

![DSDimage](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/DSDimage.png?raw=true)


## Repository Files
This repository includes the following files to run to set up the database

-[AirlineCustomerCreateTable.sql](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/AirlineCustomerCreateTable.sql)- this file contains the script that creates the relations in necessary for the database and should be run first.

-[AirlineCustomerDropTabe.sql](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/AirlineCustomerCreateTable.sql) - this file contains the script to drop the relations in the proper order, should not be run unless you want to delete the database.

-[my_own_sql_data_generator.py](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/my_own_sql_data_generator.py) - this will create csv files with random generated data, the files will be called 
“relation_name”.csv. To run this python script, make sure to install pandas, faker, and tqdm. You should copy the files into the database in this order: Customers.csv, Flight_Info.csv, Flights.csv, Tickets.csv,  Pet_Customers.csv, Indetification.csv, Rewards_Customers.csv, Reviews.csv. This order will prevent the import from failing based on foreign key constraints. NOTE: These files contain headers. A sample set of the copy commands to run in the psql command line is included in the file [import_data.txt](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/import_data.txt). Be sure to update the path to where the csv file is stored.

## Dump Command:
We were successfully able to dump the data and restore it on another computer, using commandline. Here is the command: 
### pg_dump --file "backupSQL.sql" --host "localhost" --port "5432" --username "postgres" --format=c --large-objects --verbose "AirlineCustomer"

After the command, enter your password for your postgres user.

## Restore Command:
We ran into an issue when restoring, due to foreigh key constraints not necessarily being met when the running commands in different orders, so we enabled the  "disable triggers" option which solved this issue.
### pg_restore --host "localhost" --port "5432" --username "postgres" --dbname "AirlineCustomer" --clean --if-exists --disable-triggers --verbose "backupSQL.sql"

After the command, enter your password for your postgres user.

### Output Log for Dump and Restore
[backupPSQL.log](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/backupPSQL.log)

## Dump Command with Drop, Create and Insert:
We were successfully able to dump the data and restore it on another computer, using commandline. Here is the command:
### pg_dump --file "backupSQLinserts.sql" --host "localhost" --port "5432" --username "postgres" --format=c --large-objects --inserts --rows-per-insert "1000" --create --clean --if-exists --verbose "AirlineCustomer"

After the command, enter your password for your postgres user.

## Restore Command:
We ran into an issue when restoring, due to foreigh key constraints not necessarily being met when the running commands in different orders, so we enabled the  "disable triggers" option which solved this issue.
### pg_restore --host "localhost" --port "5432" --username "postgres" --dbname "AirlineCustomer" --clean --if-exists --disable-triggers --verbose "backupSQLinserts.sql


### Output Log for Dump and Restore
[backupPSQLinserts.log](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/backupPSQLinserts.log)


## Queries
### Regular Queries in Plain English
SELECT Queries:
1. Retrieve a list of all flights including their departure and arrival locations, and scheduled times.
2. Find the total number of bookings made by each customer, including the customer's name.
3. Get the average rating from each rewards customers
4. List all customers who have traveled more than five times, including their total number of flights and the most frequent destination.

UPDATE Queries:
1. Reschedule all flights with the flight code LH594 to 11:15:00
2. Reschedule all flights that were scheduled to depart on July 22nd, 2024 to the next day.

DELETE Queries:
1. Delete all flights that were completed before June 4th, 2024.
2. Delete customer records who have not flown in the past month and has no future flights.

### The above queries are written in SQL here: [Queries](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/Queries.sql)
### The analysis for these queries is here: [QueryTiming](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/QueryTiming.log)

### Parameterized Queries:
1. Get the total number of flights to a specific destination within a specifc time range.
2. Get The rewards customers on a specific flight with a minimum status.
3. Update the seat of a specific customer on a specific flight.
4. Remove all bookings associated with a specific flight that has been canceled.

### The above queries are written in SQL here: [ParamsQueries](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ParamsQueries.sql)
### The analysis for these queries is here: [ParamQueryTiming](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ParamQueryTiming.log)


## [Indexes](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/indexes.sql)

### We created index to speed up query processing. We created the following indexes:
### Ticket Table
- FlightID
- CustomerID
- CustomerID, FLightID
### Flight Table
- FlightCode
- DepartureDate
### Review Table
- TicketID
### Identification Table
- CustomerID

### The logs for analysis and timing of regular queries are [here](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/QueryTimingIndexes.log) and for parameterized queries are [here](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ParamQueryTimingIndexes.log)

### Runtime Log Summaries

#### Regular Queries
| Query Number | Runtime Without Indexing (ms) | Runtime With Indexing (ms) | Indexes used                                     |
|--------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| 1            | 6.455                         | 5.277                      |                                                  |
| 2            | 111.229                       | 103.584                    |                                                  |
| 3            | 11.391                        | 1.61                       | idx_review_ticket_id                             |
| 4            | 412.055                       | 319.23                     | idx_ticket_customerid_flight_id                  |
| 5            | 0.602                         | 0.121                      |                                                  |
| 6            | 0.846                         | 0.686                      | idx_flight_departuredate                         |
| 7            | 1588.249                      | 141.302                    | idx_review_ticket_id, idx_flight_departuredate(2)|
| 8            | 7377.054                      | 261.332                    | idx_ticket_customerid, idx_identification_customer |

#### Parameterized Queries
| Query Number | Runtime Without Indexing (ms) | Runtime With Indexing (ms) | Index Used            |
|--------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------|
| 1            | 0.735                         | 0.104                      | idx_flight_flightcode |
| 2            | 28.801                        | 7.086                      | idx_ticket_flightid   |
| 3            | 0.739                         | 2.601                      |                       |
| 4            | 27.853                        | 5.836                      | id_ticket_flightid    |

Commit message:

Updated queries and added logs for constraints

README.md, after:

# AirlineCustomerDB

## Ariel Blumstein & Binyamin Klein

## Project Proposal

The goal of our database is to support the operations related to airlines and customers.
The general operations that are supported for customers are:
-Customer Relations
-Rewards System
-Special Needs
-Pet Customers
-Review System
-Outfacing Informational Screens

In any system handling customers, we must have a ‘Customer’ entity. In our system, we expect that we will have customers that are not part of our rewards system so they will be stored in the Customer table. However, to support a rewards system we have a RewardsCustomer, which has a IS-A relationship to customer and contains the additional information of ‘MemberID’, which will be unique to the customer, miles flown and status. To support pet customers, we have the entity PetCustomer which has an IS-A relationship with Customer, and has the extra attribute ‘species’.
In a system supporting airline customers, we seek to store identification for them, hence this led to the entity ‘Identification’, which has a many-to-one relationship with ‘Customer’ (An Identification must be in the relationship a single customer, and one customer only, yet a customer can have multiple forms of identification).
When handling Customers, we seek to allow them to purchase tickets for flights which led to the creation of a ‘Ticket’ entity and a ‘Flight’ entity. Ticket has a many-to-one relationship with both Customer and Flight, as a Ticket must have one customer and flight, yet a customer can have multiple tickets, and a flight also has multiple tickets.

In reviewing our entity for Flight, we found that though we were in Second-Normal-Form, as all attributes has a value, and the key was made up of a single attribute, we were not in Third-Normal-Form as the flights ID formed a functional dependency with the ‘FlightCode’, and flight code formed a functional dependency with ‘Destination’, ‘Origin’ and ‘DepartureTime’.      (FlightID->FlightCode and FlightCode->Destination,Origin,DepatureTime). This was a transitive dependency. So, in order to comply with Third-Normal-Form, we created a new entity called FlightInfo that stores the flight code, destination, origin and departure time attribute, and Flight will remain with just flight code and date. Flight forms a One-To-Many relationship with FlightInfo (A flight must be associated with one FlightInfo entity, however a FlightInfo entity can be associated with many flights). This change is reflected in the ERD diagram.

To handle the review operations, we created an entity known as Review, which has a one-to-one relationship with a ticket, as we only want one review per ticket, and a ticket can have max one review.
All of these entities together can support the outfacing information if a customer would want to request such.

Enums were created when we created the tables to support different value type that expect certain values. 



![ERDimage](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ERD.png?raw=true)

![DSDimage](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/DSDimage.png?raw=true)


## Repository Files
This repository includes the following files to run to set up the database

-[AirlineCustomerCreateTable.sql](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/AirlineCustomerCreateTable.sql)- this file contains the script that creates the relations in necessary for the database and should be run first.

-[AirlineCustomerDropTabe.sql](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/AirlineCustomerCreateTable.sql) - this file contains the script to drop the relations in the proper order, should not be run unless you want to delete the database.

-[my_own_sql_data_generator.py](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/my_own_sql_data_generator.py) - this will create csv files with random generated data, the files will be called 
“relation_name”.csv. To run this python script, make sure to install pandas, faker, and tqdm. You should copy the files into the database in this order: Customers.csv, Flight_Info.csv, Flights.csv, Tickets.csv,  Pet_Customers.csv, Indetification.csv, Rewards_Customers.csv, Reviews.csv. This order will prevent the import from failing based on foreign key constraints. NOTE: These files contain headers. A sample set of the copy commands to run in the psql command line is included in the file [import_data.txt](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/import_data.txt). Be sure to update the path to where the csv file is stored.

## Dump Command:
We were successfully able to dump the data and restore it on another computer, using commandline. Here is the command: 
### pg_dump --file "backupSQL.sql" --host "localhost" --port "5432" --username "postgres" --format=c --large-objects --verbose "AirlineCustomer"

After the command, enter your password for your postgres user.

## Restore Command:
We ran into an issue when restoring, due to foreigh key constraints not necessarily being met when the running commands in different orders, so we enabled the  "disable triggers" option which solved this issue.
### pg_restore --host "localhost" --port "5432" --username "postgres" --dbname "AirlineCustomer" --clean --if-exists --disable-triggers --verbose "backupSQL.sql"

After the command, enter your password for your postgres user.

### Output Log for Dump and Restore
[backupPSQL.log](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/backupPSQL.log)

## Dump Command with Drop, Create and Insert:
We were successfully able to dump the data and restore it on another computer, using commandline. Here is the command:
### pg_dump --file "backupSQLinserts.sql" --host "localhost" --port "5432" --username "postgres" --format=c --large-objects --inserts --rows-per-insert "1000" --create --clean --if-exists --verbose "AirlineCustomer"

After the command, enter your password for your postgres user.

## Restore Command:
We ran into an issue when restoring, due to foreigh key constraints not necessarily being met when the running commands in different orders, so we enabled the  "disable triggers" option which solved this issue.
### pg_restore --host "localhost" --port "5432" --username "postgres" --dbname "AirlineCustomer" --clean --if-exists --disable-triggers --verbose "backupSQLinserts.sql


### Output Log for Dump and Restore
[backupPSQLinserts.log](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/backupPSQLinserts.log)


## Queries
### Regular Queries in Plain English
SELECT Queries:
1. Retrieve a list of all flights including their departure and arrival locations, and scheduled times.
2. Find the total number of bookings made by each customer, including the customer's name.
3. Get the average rating from each rewards customers
4. List all customers who have traveled more than five times, including their total number of flights and the most frequent destination.

UPDATE Queries:
1. Reschedule all flights with the flight code GW8225 to 11:15:00
2. Reschedule all flights that were scheduled to depart on July 22nd, 2024 to the next day.

DELETE Queries:
1. Delete all flights that were completed before July 1st, 2024.
2. Delete customer records who have not flown in the past month and has no future flights.

### The above queries are written in SQL here: [Queries](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/Queries.sql)
### The analysis for these queries is here: [QueryTiming](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/QueryTiming.log)

### Parameterized Queries:
1. Get the total number of flights to a specific destination within a specifc time range.
2. Get The rewards customers on a specific flight with a minimum status.
3. Update the seat of a specific customer on a specific flight.
4. Remove all bookings associated with a specific flight that has been canceled.

### The above queries are written in SQL here: [ParamsQueries](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ParamsQueries.sql)
### The analysis for these queries is here: [ParamQueryTiming](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ParamQueryTiming.log)


## [Indexes](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/indexes.sql)

### We created index to speed up query processing. We created the following indexes:
### Ticket Table
- FlightID
- CustomerID
- CustomerID, FLightID
### Flight Table
- FlightCode
- DepartureDate
### Review Table
- TicketID
### Identification Table
- CustomerID

### The logs for analysis and timing of regular queries are [here](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/QueryTimingIndexes.log) and for parameterized queries are [here](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ParamQueryTimingIndexes.log)

### Runtime Log Summaries

#### Regular Queries
| Query Number | Runtime Without Indexing (ms) | Runtime With Indexing (ms) | Indexes used                                     |
|--------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| 1            | 6.455                         | 5.277                      |                                                  |
| 2            | 111.229                       | 103.584                    |                                                  |
| 3            | 11.391                        | 1.61                       | idx_review_ticket_id                             |
| 4            | 412.055                       | 319.23                     | idx_ticket_customerid_flight_id                  |
| 5            | 0.602                         | 0.121                      |                                                  |
| 6            | 0.846                         | 0.686                      | idx_flight_departuredate                         |
| 7            | 1588.249                      | 141.302                    | idx_review_ticket_id, idx_flight_departuredate(2)|
| 8            | 7377.054                      | 261.332                    | idx_ticket_customerid, idx_identification_customer |

#### Parameterized Queries
| Query Number | Runtime Without Indexing (ms) | Runtime With Indexing (ms) | Index Used            |
|--------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------|
| 1            | 0.735                         | 0.104                      | idx_flight_flightcode |
| 2            | 28.801                        | 7.086                      | idx_ticket_flightid   |
| 3            | 0.739                         | 2.601                      |                       |
| 4            | 27.853                        | 5.836                      | id_ticket_flightid    |

## Constraints

### We added the following constraints to make our database more robust:
1. Prevent two customers from having the same seat on a flight
2. Identification is valid such that the expiration date is after the issue date
3. Identification is valid such that the birthdate is in the past
4. Signup Date for for Rewards Customer is not in the future
5. The seat number is of a valid format
#### The commands for altering the tables to add these constraints is in [Constraints](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/Constraints.sql)

### The following are [test queries](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ConstraintBreakers.sql) to try to break the constraints to make sure they're working:
1. Break the unique seat constraint that no two customers can have the same seat on a flight
2. Beak the the identification constraint: issue date is after expiration date
3. Beak the the identification constraint: Birthdate is not in the past
4. Break the rewards customer constraint that the signup date cannot be in the future
5. Break the seat number constraint that it matches a standard pattern

### The error messages produced by each of these queries is [here.](https://github.com/AriBlumstein/AirlineCustomerDB/blob/main/ConstraintBreakers.log)
